---
layout: bio
datatype: project

title: Temporal dynamics of the human microbiome
abstract: >
    The goal of this project is to develop a long-term temporal human microbiome sampling resource.  To date, longitudinal studies have focused only on one or a few individuals, or many individuals sampled over a short amount of time.  We are currently in the beginning phase of an initial three-year study period where we are developing a cohort of approximately 700 subjects who will donate monthly microbiome samples from three body sites.  This collection of samples will allow us to investigate factors driving temporal dynamics in the human microbiome over a large population. Data generated by this project will additionally be used to test hypotheses regarding specific genes and microbial species that may be keystone members of the microbiome, to be validated with qPCR.
---

We specifically are aiming to test hypotheses relating to the individual dynamics of the stability and rate of change of the human microbiome.  Additionally, we aim to find parameters from which these important dynamics can be measured and/or predicted rapidly, and eventually used clinically for routine health monitoring.

This project is led by Dr. Caporaso's post-doc, Dr. Katy Califf.  Katy's background is in wildlife genetics, and she has extensive experience working with longitudinal datasets.  For her dissertation research, Katy worked under Dr. Kay Holekamp at Michigan State University, compiling and analyzing longitudinal data collected from a population of spotted hyenas since 1988.  These data have allowed members of Dr. Holekamp's lab to address hypotheses that wildlife biologists, particularly those studying long-lived mammals, rarely have appropriate data to test.  Some of the findings generated by these data include insights into lifetime reproductive success, effects of seasonal and longer term temporal changes (such as fluctuating prey availability and a rapidly increasing human population), stability of the social hierarchy, and the ontogeny of many behaviors, developmental pathways, and hormone profiles.  

Katy is excited to be involved in initiating this project and to have a part in creating a new longitudinal dataset that will hopefully provide valuable insights into the complexities of the microbiome and human health.  
