---
layout: bio
datatype: project

title: Flagstaff Microbiome
---

The goal of the Flagstaff Microbiome Project (FMP) is to develop a long-term temporal human microbiome sampling resource.  To date, longitudinal studies of the microbiome have focused only on one or a few individuals, or many individuals sampled over a short amount of time.  We are currently in the beginning phase of the initial three-year study period where we are developing an age/gender-stratified cohort of 1% of the population of Flagstaff, Arizona (approximately 700 subjects), who will donate monthly microbiome samples from five body sites.  This collection of samples will allow us to investigate factors driving temporal dynamics in the human microbiome over a large population. Data generated by the FMP will additionally be used to test hypotheses regarding specific genes and microbial species that may be keystone members of the microbiome, to be validated with qPCR.

This project is led by Dr. Caporaso's post-doc, Dr. Katy Califf.  Katy's background is in wildlife genetics, and she has extensive experience working with longitudinal datasets.  For her dissertation research, Katy worked under Dr. Kay Holekamp at Michigan State University, compiling and analyzing longitudinal data collected from a population of spotted hyenas since 1988.  These data have allowed members of Dr. Holekamp's lab to address hypotheses that wildlife biologists, particularly those studying long-lived mammals, rarely have appropriate data to test.  Some of the findings generated by these data include insights into lifetime reproductive success, effects of seasonal and longer term temporal changes (such as fluctuating prey availability and a rapidly increasing human population), stability of the social hierarchy, and the ontogeny of many behaviors, developmental pathways, and hormone profiles.  

Katy is excited to be involved in initiating the FMP and to have a part in creating a new longitudinal dataset that will hopefully provide valuable insights into the complexities of the microbiome and human health.  
